Sounds of the Wild West
In some ways, natural sound is an undiscovered country. Every time you hear the wilderness, you are hearing it for the first time. One day you might hear a red-winged black bird singing as the wind rustles the reeds around it. That night, the call of a coyote may ring out against a backdrop of chirping crickets as you fall asleep in your tent. These soundscapes are as rich and diverse as the natural spaces in which you’ll find them.&nbsp;
Like most of the West, Montana’s four major ecosystems are shaped and defined by water—either by water’s abundance or by the lack of it.
Dry, flat grasslands in the <em>High Plains</em> give way to a series of broad rivers in the <em>Upper Missouri</em>. These rivers are fed by snowpack from mountain ranges in the <em>Crown of the Continent</em>. Their tributaries support an abundance of wildlife residing in the <em>Greater Yellowstone</em> ecosystem.
The characteristics of an ecosystem determine what we hear. If animals are the performers in an orchestra, the ecosystem is the orchestra and the concert hall combined. Musician and naturalist Bernie Krause wrote:

The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem connects Yellowstone National Park with Montana’s ‘Big Sky’ country. Its ecological footprint crosses three states—Idaho, Wyoming, and Montana—but its natural systems are interconnected and defy political boundaries. It is known for its geothermal features, an unparalleled diversity of wildlife, and forested mountain ranges with rivers that drain to both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.
In terms of wildlife, Yellowstone National Park is home to <strong>5</strong> species of amphibians, <strong>67</strong> species of mammals, and nearly <strong>300</strong> species of birds.
Yellowstone’s elk migrate seasonally from high elevation zones in the summer, to lowlands in the winter. During the breeding season (September and early October), it is common to hear the shrill unmistakable call of a male Elk announcing his presence.
In this photo, a mother grizzly bear looks out for her cub.
Although grizzly bears have a reputation for being top predators, they actually have a diverse diet including berries, plant roots, fish, tubers, and nuts.
Wolves are extremely social animals, with a range of vocalizations they use to communicate.
Most famous, of course, is their high-pitched howl, which can be heard as many as six miles away.
The distinct call of these birds sounds uncannily similar to a beloved brass instrument, which is how trumpeter swans got their name. With a wingspan of up to eight feet, they are the largest waterfowl in North America.
The swans were once on the verge of extinction, with a population of fewer than 70 birds worldwide. Today, there are approximately 46,000 trumpeter swans in North America, although they number just 29 in Yellowstone National Park.
The Crown of the Continent lies to the northwest of Yellowstone. One of the largest intact ecosystems in the United States, it crosses deep into the temperate forests of Canada. Glacier National Park and the National Bison Range sit at the heart of the ecosystem, while the vast Bob Marshall Wilderness is found further south. The Rocky Mountain Front bisects this area, creating stark differences in elevation and the types of flora and fauna found throughout.

Below, you can hear a startled mule deer snort and run past the microphone.
They have distinctive black tips on their tail and long ears, and rely on keen hearing to detect approaching predators.&nbsp;
The American black bear is smaller and more common in North America than the grizzly bear. Typically, they live in forested areas.
Black bears will grunt and click in earnest when they are concerned or nervous for their cubs, or sometimes when they are feeling social.&nbsp;
Sheep are a common livestock in the western United States. Sometimes they’re hunted by predators like wolves and coyotes.
This has caused conflict between the carnivores and some ranchers in the west. In this recording, a curious lamb investigates a microphone and recorder near Dupuyer, Montana.
To the east of the Rocky Mountain Front lies the High Plains Ecosystem. This area includes some of the world’s largest remaining stretches of intact grasslands. Thousands of migratory birds flock here—their calls at first light create the prairie’s distinctive dawn chorus.
Great horned owls are nocturnal and keen hunters. They call to one another to signify their territory and announce their presence.
Their soft rhythmic calls follow a pattern of hoo-hoo, hoo, hoo.
The coyote is a relative of the gray wolf and is commonly found throughout North America.
They are among the most vocal wild mammals on the continent, relying on a variety of noises to communicate. Coyotes are nocturnal, hunting for prey at night and returning to their dens during the day.
Black-tailed prairie dogs are one of five prairie dog species found in western North America.
They live in large colonies sometimes known as “prairie dog towns” that echo with lively chirping when potential predators are near.
In central Montana, the Upper Missouri Ecosystem includes the headwaters of the Missouri River, the continent’s longest river. 
Often considered Montana’s heartland, the Upper Missouri region features some of the most diverse terrain in the state. Dense forests, steep mountains, and grassy plains are all found within this ecosystem. Like much of the state, it also has a rich ranching tradition; in the early part of the 20th century, the region had one of the largest sheep ranches in the world, which at times numbered 300,000 animals.
The Missouri River’s floodplain deposits rich nutrients in the surrounding soil.
The grasslands supported by this soil made abundant grazing spaces, which laid the foundation for a vibrant ranching economy.
Red-winged blackbirds are commonly found near freshwater and wetland habitats in the Upper Missouri Ecosystem.
The red patches on the males are particularly visible when they make their classic “conk-la-ree” call.
Boreal chorus frogs are rarely seen but often heard throughout the western United States. Their collective sound more than compensates for their tiny stature.
Since 2013, the&nbsp;<a href="http://acousticatlas.org/" rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank">Acoustic Atlas</a>&nbsp;has collected sounds throughout Montana and the West. The archive is based at the&nbsp;<a href="https://www.lib.montana.edu/" rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank">Montana State University Library</a>&nbsp;and has become one of the premier online collections of natural sounds in the United States.
The audio featured above represents just a tiny sampling of the wealth of material the atlas has to offer. Let your ears take you on a trip of discovery throughout this vast collection, and hear some of the sounds that make other regions unique.&nbsp;
